This is not Iraq or Libya or Syria. So,
stop with those [music] comparisons.
I just I think what we should be making
is Latin American comparisons.
>> [music]
>> And those are actually I think more
helpful and lead to a little bit more
optimism. Go on.
>> [music]
>> So, what is actually happening in
Venezuela? Is it
>> a stunning regime [music] change? Is it
proof of a new Trump
>> Trump doctrine. Trump doctrine.
>> Trump doctrine.
>> Then I'll call it the Don Rowe document.
I don't know. Or is it just US
imperialism as usual? So, we'll be
selling large amounts of oil to other
countries. My guest [music] today helped
make US policy toward Latin America for
three Republican presidents, [music]
Ronald Reagan, George W. Bush, and in
Donald Trump's first term.
He's intimately familiar with coups and
civil wars
>> [music]
>> and transitions to democracy. And he's
long been an advocate of overthrowing
Nicolás Maduro. But maybe not
overthrowing him this way.
Elliott Abrams, welcome to Interesting
Times. Thank you. We're just going to
jump right in, though I should actually
mention that we are recording this on a
Tuesday morning. Ideally, the episode
will appear relatively quickly, but
obviously we're talking about events
that are very much in flux and there's
always a possibility that the landscape
will shifted even in 24 to 48 hours. So,
listeners should bear that in mind. But
to begin, last November, you wrote an
essay for Foreign Affairs with the very
much of the moment title How to topple
Maduro. Why regime change is the only
way forward in Venezuela.
Congratulations. He's He's been toppled.
Is this the policy to the extent that we
know what the policy is that you wanted
and argued for then?
Uh no, I was arguing for a policy of
regime change. And we don't seem to have
that policy. The regime is still in
place
in Caracas fully.
Um and the uh if you will, the front
man, Delcy Rodríguez, is being accepted
uh by the United States. She is
surrounded by uh indicted
drug trafficking criminals who are still
in place.
So, I would like to hear more from the
administration about how we move from
this moment to
uh democracy in
Venezuela. Um we've heard the word
elections from president, from secretary
of state. Um but we've heard nothing
about how they how and why they think
this bunch of criminals is going to
commit suicide uh by leading to a
democratic transition.
So, stepping back for a second and we'll
dig into the situation on the ground,
but just walk me through the basic
argument for why
regime change in Venezuela should be a
priority for the United States. What the
benefits of actually changing the
regime, not just changing the front man,
are supposed to be.
Sure. Uh Venezuela was at one time uh
just about the leading democracy in
Latin America and a very prosperous
country.
Uh under Chávez and Maduro, they've
ruined all that. It's now a brutal
dictatorship that first of all has
immiserated the people of Venezuela.
Has led to the greatest refugee flow in
the history of Latin America. Eight
million Venezuelans, about a fourth of
the population, have moved out. Um which
which creates obvious difficulties for
all of their neighbors, including us.
Uh with that high a migration flow, they
have invited into Venezuela
um Cuban thugs
um and Hezbollah and Iran, as well as
Russia and China. So, it's a security
issue
uh for the whole region, again,
including for the United States. Uh
there's also the oil question, which I
frankly think is marginal given world
oil markets. I think the president is
exaggerating that pretty wildly. Um but
they do have a lot of oil. They also
have some critical minerals, some rare
earth minerals, that should be
um investigated further for the benefit
of uh Venezuela and us as well.
And Venezuela is one of the reasons that
the regime in Cuba remains in place
because it gives um substantial amount
of subsidized or free
oil uh to Cuba, which is propping up
that vicious regime. So, um a transition
to democracy in Venezuela would benefit
first of all the people of Venezuela,
um but everyone else in the Caribbean
and Latin American region and us. Can
you just talk for a minute more about
the geopolitical component? When you say
the regime in Venezuela has invited in
Hezbollah or invited in Russia or China,
just just make that concrete. What are
we talking about in terms of
both presence and advantages for our
adversaries in having a friendly regime
in Caracas?
Uh for Hezbollah, for example,
>> [clears throat and cough]
>> and Iran, we know that the Maduro regime
gave them blank passports
so that agents of Iran and Hezbollah
could be uh
moving around Latin America and
elsewhere under false identities. We
know that Iran has helped not only give
drones to the Venezuelan military, but
helped them learn how to build drones.
We know from uh
the Israeli experience with Iran, uh
drones can go a very long distance now.
We're talking about drones that can hit
uh not only Puerto Rico, but hit the
continental United States.
We know that Iran has at least um when I
was in the State Department doing this
about 5 years ago,
uh Iran was contemplating giving
intermediate range missiles which could
reach the United States uh to the Maduro
regime in Venezuela. So, this is an
actual uh security threat in Latin
America and to us.
And on the drug side of things, you
know, the Trump administration has been
talking about drug trafficking.
Obviously, the charges against
uh
the dictator Maduro are related to drug
trafficking. At the same time, Venezuela
has never been seen as a central node
for fentanyl, you know, for sort of the
aspects of the drug trade that Americans
are most concerned about, that have
killed most Americans.
What is Venezuela's role in the drug
trafficking networks right now in your
estimation?
>> Well, I think the the fentanyl issue is
completely phony. Um but uh the cocaine
issue is not phony.
The coca comes from Colombia
uh and moves east into Venezuela and is
trafficked out of Venezuela, or at least
was until the last uh couple of months,
um by air and by sea.
Uh some of it, much of it, I think goes
toward Europe. Uh but some of it comes
to the United States. It it is not a an
accident that the ELN, the guerrilla
group that's heavily engaged in drug
trafficking now, is mostly in western
Venezuela, having been driven out uh
substantially driven out of Colombia by
the cooperation between the US and the
governments of Colombia over the years.
Venezuela is a key node in the
trafficking of Colombian cocaine. What
do you think the administration is
actually thinking
at the moment in terms of from from what
you can see. You were in the first Trump
administration. You're obviously not in
the second Trump administration, but
what is their calculus
based on what we know after, you know,
three or four days? It's not entirely
clear to me. Um but um Nor nor to me,
but
>> Yeah. But but let me do the best I can.
The Trump administration has reached the
conclusion that an immediate transition
to democracy, um to a government run by
um Edmundo González, who was elected
president a year and a half ago,
and María Corina Machado, uh is not
possible instantly. Um and therefore we
have to work on a transition. And the
transition you have to work with uh the
guys who are in there now. So, what you
do is uh you begin to make demands. And
we will make demands. We'll make demands
about the oil industry. Um we'll make
demands about getting uh the Iranians,
Hezbollah, Cubans, et cetera
out. Uh I'd like to think we'll make
demands about politics and human rights.
Uh so far we haven't. But you know, this
is a process and it will take some time,
but we'll get there and we'll get to
free elections. And we've got to work
with the people um who are there. Um but
we can we can make this work for the
benefit of Venezuelans and of course for
our benefit. I mean, I think that's the
administration view. And do you think
that that's naive, unrealistic? What do
you What do you think is likely to
happen on if that is the plan? What
would you expect? I think the problem
with that plan is that we are relying
on a bunch of criminals
uh to drive themselves from power
willingly,
to commit suicide.
Um
in the Latin American cases with which
I'm familiar from my time in the Reagan
administration, we did a lot of um
transitions in Latin America and South
America. There's always a negotiation
with the army. There is always a
process. It does take time. There is
always an amnesty. In those cases,
Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Chile, you
know, we were talking about generals.
These people are not generals. These
people are just criminals.
Uh and they face a very difficult fate
if and when they leave power. And they
don't want to leave power. So, we are
relying on them to conduct a reform
program or I I I mean, I hope we are.
Otherwise, you'll never get to
democratization and free elections. I I
give you a concrete example.
It was fairly shocking to me that in all
the appearances administration people
made over the weekend, Secretary Rubio,
I think, did every Sunday show. He did
not demand the immediate release of all
political prisoners.
Why not?
I can understand that there are things
that you think um Delcy Rodríguez can't
do.
Uh she can't fire the strong men of the
regime.
Uh the Minister of Defense, Padrino, the
Minister of Interior, Cabello.
Uh maybe.
But if she can't free political
prisoners, then she has no power at all
and we're dealing with the wrong person.
So, I think this is the fundamental
problem with the way the administration
has set this up.
Our interests do not coincide with the
interests of the people in this regime
still running the country. Unless we are
perfectly happy with endless
dictatorship, brutal
dictatorship in Venezuela, which, by the
way, will only increase the um
the flow of migrants out of Venezuela.
So, let's Well, let's let's let's take
that possibility because I think
certainly there are probably people
inside the Trump administration who are
indifferent to the question of democracy
in Venezuela. I'm doubtful that
Secretary Rubio is one of them, but I
think some people would be. Um who might
say that some of the things that you
listed earlier that the United States
could want from Venezuela,
um a change above all in its
relationship to hostile actors, to Iran,
Russia, and China
are perfectly possible in a world where
some kind of dictatorship remains in
power. And essentially then
from a kind of, you know, America first
perspective, the sort that the president
likes to talk about, you could have a
world where effectively you take the
regime and flip its geopolitics and say,
okay, you're still a dictatorship, but
guess what? Now you're America-aligned,
our oil companies are coming back in,
maybe we want your help toppling the
Cuban regime, who knows, but
we don't care one way or another about
democracy.
What else do you see
sort of
abstracting away from moral
considerations, right? To the extent
that you can, what else do you see as
wrong with that view of what what the
administration might be thinking? This
regime, which again remains in place, is
thoroughly
corrupt. I do not think you will have
the economic revival that uh we want,
that the United States wants, um with
this corrupt group in power. Point one.
Point two,
uh the president has threatened
Iran.
You shoot demonstrators, you know,
there'll be hell to pay, whatever his
language was.
Suppose there is a demonstration for the
freeing of political prisoners in
Caracas in a week or a month. A big
demonstration.
Remembering that the people of Venezuela
have already spoken in the presidential
election year and a half ago, an unfair
election, terribly unfair. Nevertheless,
um Machado's ticket won
67% of the vote, huge
landslide. Suppose there's Okay, so
those people go out in the streets.
Tell me what happens. People are shot,
beaten, jailed. I don't think uh we can
I I mean, politically, I just don't
think it's going to be possible for the
administration to turn away from that
and say, "Oh, those are our people. If
they thought they had to shoot
demonstrators, that's fine." I don't
think that's possible. So, I think this
is actually an unstable uh situation.
Give me the alternative plan then.
>> Okay. You're You're in charge You're
You're now in charge of the Trump
administration.
I guess starting from where we are,
rather than
three where we were three or four days
ago, what is the alternative approach to
regime change? Let me just go back to
what happened in the rest of South
America
years ago.
You do need a negotiation between the
people in power and the democratic
political forces, democratic parties.
You need to negotiate about a lot of
things. One of them is always
amnesty.
Another of them is what's the trajectory
here
that gets you in the end to a full
democracy. When are there municipal
elections, state elections? When's the
presidential election? When does the
opposition start getting full access to
uh state-run
media? There are There are a lot of
questions to negotiate. In all the other
South American cases, that negotiation
took months and months, if not years.
We didn't have that in Venezuela because
we got rid of Maduro overnight.
What the United States should be doing
now is saying, uh we understand that
there needs to be a negotiation um by
the democratic opposition forces with
both the Chavista party
and the military.
And that is not going to be an overnight
negotiation.
We give our full support to the
democratic forces. Edmundo González is
the legit the legitimate president. He
may not be able to take over tomorrow,
but he is.
Uh María Corina Machado is obviously the
leader of the opposition.
We then, maybe under our our own
auspices, maybe it's the Vatican, we
foster a negotiation to settle all of
those
questions. Uh maybe it takes a month and
maybe it takes 6 months,
but it's the fundamentally the same
process that was gone through by other
Latin American countries.
And maybe some of them
can actually help and foster the
negotiations because there are still
people alive who went through that.
Um I understand the administration's
conclusion that it could not be done
overnight.
But what's missing here is strong
support for the democratic forces rather
than undermining and deprecation
of the democratic forces, the democratic
parties.
If we were to do what I'm suggesting, I
think it would work and I think that it
would
create
a division that would be extremely
helpful
between the Chavista political forces.
People who are politicians, who are
mayors or governors of states, who in a
future Venezuela in a year or two would
run for office,
on the one side, and on the other side,
the vicious thugs that have control of
the of the police and the army and
who've got to go.
What is our leverage apart from
obviously our demonstrated ability to
pluck
pluck the dictator out and take him to
New York. I'm going to concede that that
that suggests some leverage, but say we
adopt the Abrams plan here and we take
it, uh you know, to the people who
you've described as criminals who are in
charge of Venezuela,
and they say, "Absolutely not. Why I We
don't want to negotiate away our own
power. Um we don't believe in amnesty.
We don't believe it'll be honored. We
don't want to go into exile." Um they
give you the middle finger. What is the
United States' move
in [snorts] that in that situation? Is
it to threaten further military action?
Um
>> [clears throat]
>> combination of things. Um President has
already threatened further military
action.
That is true. And that's Yes. Um and not
not only not only in Venezuela, but yes.
>> mean, in Venezuela, I don't think he
wants to do it, but it would be foolish
for him to have taken it off the table
completely.
Um [snorts] we are blocking their oil
exports. We can continue to do that. We
have massive economic sanctions. We can
refuse to lift them. There are some
intelligence things I would like to see
being done right now, too.
Padrino's family, uh they seem to live
very well.
Why don't we say to Padrino,
um that's over. We're coming for your
money.
And say the same thing to Delcy
Rodríguez and the rest of them. We're
coming for your money. You're going to
end up out of office, probably out of
your country, and destitute, unless you
play ball with us. I want you to talk
about what went on in the first Trump
administration when you were involved in
the policy, right? But my sense from
public reports and so on is that the
administration has been engaged in some
kind of negotiation with some elements
in this government for some time. And
that there's a lot of speculation about
how and why the Maduro raid went on, but
clearly people people in the White House
and
in the Department of State were trying
to get Maduro
to agree to his own version, I think, of
sort of what you're describing, where he
slinks away into a gilded exile and the
country moves on. And all of this is
happening under conditions of embargo,
blockade, and then escalating military
strikes. The US has been striking drug
boats and so on, or at least alleged
drug boats.
Um I'm I'm just trying to imagine
administration official
maybe saying, "Well, you know, yes,
maybe there are some more dials we can
turn, some more things we can threaten,
but we've already been
pushing a lot of those buttons. We've
already spent a year or so
making making those kind of approaches.
How does that narrative compare to what
you saw
in 2016 to 2020, when obviously there
was
there were efforts to achieve regime
change then? Well, I don't know what we
have been
uh saying to Maduro for example,
obviously the president wanted him to
to leave, but I don't know what we were
saying in those conversations about what
would happen
to the regime after he left.
Um we had no such conversations with
Maduro.
I was doing this in 2019 and 2020.
Um Maduro had just stolen the 2018
presidential
election. We said that he had stolen it
and that he was not the legitimate
president. That is why we
viewed Juan Guaidó
as the legitimate interim president. We
did not have those conversations then.
And the reason that you can have them
much more um effectively now is
uh what we just did militarily. I mean,
the the when we say to
this little junta that's now running the
country,
Padrino Cabello, Delcy Rodríguez, her
brother, Jorge Rodríguez,
um here's what you need to do.
I mean, we obviously have a much a a
greater chance of success now that
they've seen
Maduro removed by American military
force and have to wonder,
is it conceivable that I could end up
the way Maduro ended up? The answer is,
sure, it's conceivable. It could happen
again.
Um
but that was not what we're doing back
then. What we were doing back then was
making a bet that failed,
that the combination of political and
diplomatic and economic pressure,
sanctions,
would force the regime into a real
negotiation with the opposition and a
real transition to democracy. And it did
not work. And it did not work, I think,
um
I mean, my view of this, again, sort of
in the context of the Reagan years, we
had done that kind of negotiation with
generals in South American countries.
They were not criminals.
They wanted to go back to the barracks
and retire. And all they needed was an
amnesty for having done the coup.
This is not the situation in Venezuela.
These are real criminals engaged in
uh human trafficking, drug trafficking,
gold trafficking, and of course massive
massive human rights abuses over the
last, particularly last decade.
So, the analogy failed. Give me a couple
concrete examples of the
situations with generals that you have
in mind in the Latin American past.
Uruguay.
There was a negotiation between the
generals, the junta that was running the
country, and the democratic political
parties
uh
and it was called the
Naval Club Agreement, the Club Naval
Agreement. They sat together. They
negotiated it, including an amnesty of
Julio María Sanguinetti as the first
democratic president after the coup.
Same negotiation in Argentina and in
Chile, really, the the um
socialist and Christian Democratic
parties
uh negotiated with elements of the
military.
Uh it it really it it happened in all
these cases. It was different in each
case.
>> In all of those cases, though, I I guess
I'm more familiar with Argentina and
Chile than Uruguay. Um
but in at least in the Argentinian and
Chilean cases,
it wasn't just that generals had done a
coup and wanted to go back to their
barracks. They also were implicated in
massive human rights abuses, executions,
disappearances of political prisoners,
and so on, right? So,
there is a sense in which
there is that parallel here. What is the
difference?
>> you're you're exactly right. The
difference is that um the generals
wanted an amnesty for human rights
violations,
um but they weren't in it to get rich.
They weren't just a bunch of people uh
engaged in drug trafficking, gold
trafficking to enrich
themselves. Um they did what they did.
They thought
because they were fighting communism.
The this is a different crowd and it is,
in in my opinion, it's just it's just a
criminal junta that's now and we have
them under indictment. That I mean, I'm
not making this up.
Right. Yeah, I
I want [clears throat] to come back to
to the 1980s in a minute and talk about
bigger picture questions about
conservative foreign policy. But just
just to go on on the point about
generals, what what is the role of the
Venezuelan military then at this moment?
Is there a scenario where
the Venezuelan military, as distinct
from the paramilitary groups on the one
hand and the circle
uh that was around Maduro, that's now
around Rodríguez on the other hand,
says, "We want We want to negotiate a
settlement and we're willing to
essentially kick out or fight with
the other elements in the regime, the
more explicitly criminal elements in
your formulation." Yes, that is what we
hoped in 2019 and 2020.
There were a couple of problems. One was
a massive presence of Cuban intelligence
agents whose job was to coup-proof
uh the regime by making sure that
dissidents in the army were found and
killed or jailed. So, that didn't work.
Could it work now? Yeah, we need a
negotiation.
Um the first thing you need to do,
though, is probably get rid of the
uh as part of this negotiation, the top
layer has to go. When I When I say you
need a negotiation, I mean,
in Chile,
after uh we helped get rid of Pinochet,
and they had elected a a democratic
president, who was the head of the army?
Pinochet.
That was the deal they had to negotiate.
So, it's always a compromise. And that
is the kind of negotiation they're going
to have to do with the army.
But I think what we should be saying,
and I hope, you know, this is the
messaging from CIA, for example, to
people in the army,
and I know that it is the messaging from
the opposition to people in the army,
"This is a big country. Venezuela is
twice the size of
California. We have long borders. We
need an army. We need a professional
army. We need you. Um you will have a We
will have a better army. We will have a
modern army.
We'll have an army that's not corrupt.
Um
that's the messaging that should be
delivered to people in the army, and
we'll have an amnesty.
And I hope that that is the message
that they're getting, because if there's
any hope of bringing the army into this
process
of ending the regime and bringing
Venezuela back to democracy, it's going
to have to be with that kind of
messaging.
As I'm listening to you, though, it does
seem like the fundamental change in US
leverage that is opening the
possibilities that you're arguing for is
just that we have used military force,
seemingly successfully, or successfully
for what we were trying to do,
against the regime. And the blockade.
And the right, and the blockade.
But on on the military front,
how much further can you can can you
realistically go?
Like, what what is is step two just
saying,
"Guess what, we captured Maduro, we can
go in and go in and snatch and grab
Rodríguez or anybody else? Is it beyond
that we can actually insert US forces in
some kind of seizure of power mode?"
What is What is your assessment of the
range of military options available?
There are a large uh range of options
that I think the president doesn't want
um to
engage in. But for example,
um drone strikes or air strikes on more
parts of the military
um and intelligence structure. We did
some of those.
Could do more of those. We could take
the oil facilities, you know, put troops
in there.
Um we could kill
leaders of the regime. Presumably, uh
you you could do another raid or you
could use drone strikes. And you could
kill some of them. I mean, there's a lot
more things we could do.
Uh I I I think it's clear the president
doesn't want
uh long-term military involvement of
that sort.
Um but but the opportunities are
certainly there.
And the president doesn't want them for
his own very specific reasons, um but
also because
he campaigned and ran for president,
repeatedly, as a skeptic and critic of
US military interventions, like the
interventions in Iraq, in Libya, and
elsewhere. And I feel like everyone who
has argued for
a harder push for regime change in
Venezuela has had to grapple with that
record, those legacies. How do you
grapple with that? I would really urge
everyone to stop making Iraq analogies.
This is not
the Middle East. There are no Sunnis and
Shias and Kurds and Druze shooting at
each other. This is a homogeneous
society
with a long history of democracy.
This is not Iraq or Libya or Syria. So,
stop with those comparisons. Uh I just I
think what we should be making is Latin
American comparisons. And those are
actually, I think, more helpful and lead
to a little bit more optimism. Go on. I
want to argue this a little bit because
I'm I'm one of those skeptics, right?
And I I absolutely hear you. I don't
think Venezuela resembles Iraq in any
kind of exact way. But just in our
conversation, you have been discussing
sort of the complexity and depths of
criminality in the leadership of the
regime, the fact that there are
mili- paramilitary cadres
separate from the military or
overlapping with it that are loyal to
the regime. You've mentioned that
Venezuela is a country twice the size of
California with some pretty forbidding
geographic features. You've mentioned in
Venezuela the presence of powerful drug
gangs in territory adjacent to Colombia,
which itself fought long and bloody
counterinsurgencies. And it's easy for
me to say, "Okay, there are reasons to
think that
if you could get to the kind of
negotiation you want to get to, that
some kind of government new government
could stabilize Colombia." I'm open to
that scenario. But it does seem like
there are certainly plenty of ways in
which a harder push for regime change
gets you into
counterinsurgency and civil war dynamics
that that certainly have existed in
Latin America, including in your own
experience in past Republican
administrations.
>> That's right. Sure. Aren't those
substantial worries? Like the the
government falls and the criminal gang
retreats to the hinterland, makes money
off co- the cocaine trade, and fights a
bloody civil war for the next 10 years.
>> okay.
Yes.
All these terrible things are
conceivable and very unlikely. Why? Take
the colectivos, these sort of
paramilitary
gangs that are used to
um beat up people who from the from the
Democratic parties who demonstrate.
They are
paid and motivated by the government of
Venezuela, by the regime.
>> [clears throat]
>> If that stops,
they'll go away. They're doing this cuz
they're paid to do it. They won't stop
doing it. They're hired
gangs.
>> But but why would they not be paid to do
it in a scenario where regime elements
continue to,
you know, essentially operate as drug
gangs, which is how a lot of
paramilitaries
in in everywhere from Peru to Colombia
have have operated, right? Like, isn't
isn't there money available
to pay them even if the regime cracks up
in some way just because of drug money?
>> drug gangs, take the ELN.
First of all,
Tell us just for our listeners, tell us
about the ELN.
>> the National Liberation Army, Spanish
initials, Colombian
guerrilla group decades old, forced
actually across the border into western
Venezuela.
Um
They're foreigners and they're pretty
small. Again, in a country twice the
size of California. What you need to
worry about is the army
and the police under
Diosdado Cabello. So, if he decides to
uh try to finance and lead an
insurgency, kill him.
We took out Soleimani, and that's what
he needs to be told right now. Don't
think about it. It will not end well for
you. Supporting the democratic forces in
Venezuela. It will be difficult and
complex, and it will take months and
months of negotiation.
And there will be people on the regime
side, the Chavista side, who resist and
maybe who take up arms. That's why you
need to get the army on on the side of
democracy. I'm not saying this is easy.
What I'm saying is
it happened throughout Latin America,
and it can be done in Venezuela. But
what it really requires is that we,
the United States, the gringos,
get on the right side. There is a very
famous moment in in Chile
in the movie that was made about the the
transition,
uh which won a lot of awards, when
there's a young man who's uh
for the opposition says to his boss,
"You know, we're going to fight
Pinochet." And the boss says, "You're
never going to be able to do this.
Uh the gringos won't let it happen."
And the young man says, "No. No, the the
gringos are with us, with the
opposition, trying to get rid of
Pinochet." That's what's missing now in
Venezuela.
Whose side are we on? But of course, we
were on Pinochet's side
>> Not for a sub- for a substantial period
of time.
>> we got on the right side.
Right. But much of US foreign policy in
Latin America has been conducted sort of
in multiple registers, right? With a
kind of formal commitment to democracy
and human rights, but also with a
willingness, sometimes an eagerness, to
support dictatorial and authoritarian
regimes for the greater good of
combating a geopolitical rival or the
ideology of communism, right?
>> for most of your lifetime and mine. Uh
that history of the early Cold War
period is absolutely correct. Before the
Cold War, you have Franklin Roosevelt
famously saying of Somoza, the
Nicaraguan dictator then, uh he he's
a son of a but he's our son of a
And that ended starting in about 19
70-75.
That's a long time ago. And we've been
on the right side of this for very long
time, and we ought to stay on the right
side. I want to talk about
what Trump represents in that light, but
let's talk about the 1980s though for a
minute.
Because
I think,
you know, a lot of a lot of people who
have been critics of you personally for
a very long time would say that, "No, in
fact, we really got on the right side of
it when the Soviet Union cracked up and
the Cold War ended. And in the 1980s,
what you had was a Reagan administration
that was, like the Carter administration
before it, eager to speak the language
of democracy and human rights, but also
ended up supporting a lot of different
both regimes and rebellions, insurgents
insurgent forces that were themselves
authoritarian, even murderous, for the
sake of anti-communism. And then that
obviously is then taken up on the right
by contemporary would-be realists to
say, "Look, if you know, Ronald Reagan
did this." But
That Well, that's wrong. It's
ahistorical.
Um if you ask anybody who was part of
the movement to get rid of Pinochet
under uh Ronald Reagan, who lived
through it,
um they they know the actual story,
which is how hard we pushed for the
referendum
um that led to an election getting rid
of Pinochet. People usually call upon El
Salvador as a model. We [snorts]
supported José Napoleón Duarte, the
Christian Democrat.
He was elected president.
He led El Salvador into democracy. And
what happened to the FMLN guerrillas?
They laid down their arms. They were not
all murdered. They won an election, and
their victory was respected in El
Salvador and by the United States
government. This notion that what we
were doing in the, I don't know, 1940s
in backing dictators in Latin America is
the history, period. And it kind of ends
with Franklin Roosevelt or or I don't
know, Henry Kissinger. That is not what
happened under Carter and Reagan and
Bush and Clinton and ever since. And it
is that that I am hoping um
the Trump administration will remain uh
faithful to. Don't you think the actual
history is a little messier than that?
That the US was, yes, involved in
pushing for democratic transitions, but
in the context of the 1980s was also
arming and supporting
in an effort to be counterrevolutionary
and resist communism, regimes and
movements that committed serious war
crimes. Isn't that just true?
Um
It is again, um
when Ronald Reagan came to power, which
is January 1981, he did not adopt the
policy of backing the military junta in
El Salvador.
Jimmy Carter adopted that policy.
We inherited that policy. Why did Jimmy
Carter do that? Because he was
indifferent to war crimes, crimes
against humanity? No. He did it because
it was a communist effort to overthrow
the government of El Salvador and do in
El Salvador what had been done in
Nicaragua. Now, take Nicaragua. We
backed the contras. Why?
Because we wanted to restore a chance of
democracy in Nicaragua. So, what
happened? We pushed them into an
election, and there was a democracy
until Daniel Ortega came back and to
this day prevents the return of
democracy to Nicaragua. We were on
the right side. Did we have to fight?
Did we have to have on our side unsavory
people? Yeah. And I would I mean, this
is We Should we not have Should we not
have helped the Soviet Union defeat
Hitler? I mean, this is world politics,
and sometimes sometimes your allies are
very unsavory people. The question is,
in my mind, what are you doing this for?
What's the goal? Who are you trying to
help?
And the answer in El Salvador was, in
that case, the Christian Democrats and a
return to democracy. Did we work with
the generals? Yeah, and we pushed them
and pushed them in the direction of
democratization.
So, the notion that this is a
terrible history of the support for war
criminals is a-historical.
>> [snorts]
>> I guess what I'm what I'm interested in
in part here, though, is
continuity versus change in how the
Trump administration is approaching
approaching these issues, right? Because
there is, on the one hand,
there's a narrative that says, "Look,
you know,
Trumpism, with its emphasis on
realpolitik and great power conflict,
and, you know, natural resources, and so
on, is this total break with Reaganism
and the Reagan era." At the same time,
it is also the case that, as you
yourself just said, Ronald Reagan
accepted alliances and deals with what
you would you just called unsavory
forces, right? Which means, again,
concretely, people who committed war
crimes in some cases. And this extended
outside Latin America. It encompassed,
um, you know, debates over South Africa,
regimes regimes in Africa, and so on.
There was plenty of US support for Yeah,
but Ross dictators I mean, really,
really.
Uh, Ronald Reagan supported, quotes,
the dictator Chun Doo Hwan in South
Korea. He embraced him and pushed him
out. He embraced Ferdinand Marcos in the
Philippines and pushed him out.
The policy of the Reagan administration
was to promote democracy wherever and
whenever we could. Nobody Nobody likes
his
but that's the historical fact. What do
you think people inside the Trump
administration
think? I again, I know this is
speculation, but let's take let's take
the Secretary of State, Marco Rubio. I
think absolutely
5 years ago,
um,
Rubio would have essentially made
exactly the argument you just made about
the Reagan era and said, "Look, you
know, you make compromises in foreign
policy.
You make deals. You embrace unsavory
characters.
But the important thing is to have
democracy as this kind of,
you know, polestar for for your
efforts."
That's not the rhetoric that I hear from
him overall right now. So, do you think
that that is that that
that that has just shifted, basically,
and the current Trump administration is
just a break with
the Reagan era past?
Yeah, I mean, I I
I believe
>> You're hopeful that it's not, but I I
believe that Secretary Rubio, I mean,
you can look at Rubio's record in the
Senate, long record of public service.
Um,
uh, I think he would like to see
democracy in
Venezuela, in Cuba, in Nicaragua.
I think
the president has no real interest in
that.
So, there's an internal debate in the
administration. I'm sure Rubio isn't the
only person in the administration who
would like to see the expansion of
democracy and respect for
um, human rights.
Um, and I would assume, without knowing,
uh, that Rubio is constantly trying to
figure out,
um,
can he separate himself
from the president on issue A? Can he
push the president forward on issue B?
Um, does he need to be quiet on issue C?
There's an element of that in any
administration, obviously.
Um, but it's a lot greater a lot
greater, it seems to me, in this
administration.
What What do you think the president
thinks
that we're doing in Venezuela? Because
he, you know, we we talked earlier
and you said the drug issue is real, but
it's not really about fentanyl.
The oil issue is real, but not nearly as
substantial as issues related to human
rights and geopolitics.
To the the What the president wants to
talk about is the oil,
right? That's that that I mean, he talks
about a lot of things, but that
Do you think that that is sort of a
you know, something that he has been
sort of sold on? Do you I mean, what
if you had to say, if you had to explain
why you think we made this decision now,
why Donald Trump made this decision now,
what would you say? To me, this is
actually a mystery, and in fact, it's
the largest mystery.
Uh, I don't know the answer.
Think what's going on in the world, you
know, from Gaza to Ukraine, Taiwan.
Uh, why did the president elevate this?
Why is Venezuela so important to him?
Who is telling him this about the oil,
for example?
Uh, I've talked to a number of people in
the oil industry. I mean, I did 5 years
ago when I was in the State Department.
Uh, you can read what people are saying
and writing now anonymously.
People in the industry know there's no
great oil bonanza here.
Uh, they know that there are not lines
forming to spend 10 billion to invest 10
billion dollars in
Venezuelan oil.
Um,
so, I don't understand where
this is actually coming from. It does
seem that it's not, you know, the
president's desire to
um, democratize Venezuela. I can argue
that it's a kind of perfect storm from
his point of view, migration,
oil,
drugs.
But again, if you, you know, go one step
further, the migration issue, well,
we've closed the Mexican border.
Uh, Venezuelans are not going to be able
to get here. Um, the oil issue, I've
argued not as big as it looks. The drug
issue,
substantial, um, but, um, not as
substantial as the president's making
out.
Um,
The Monroe Doctrine.
>> Okay. Or the the Don the Don Roe
Doctrine, as we as we must now call it,
right? So, there's two
two arguments here, maybe. One is
a view that maybe Trump has been
convinced that
the US should just be treating the
Western Hemisphere as its sphere of
influence, in which we have much more
total influence and power than we do
right now.
And
that that also explains the fixation on
Greenland, these kinds of things. And
that can be seen either in kind of
isolationist terms, where Trump wants us
to basically retreat to
a fortress America that encompasses both
Americas, or in a kind of
geo-strategic perspective, where it's
like, "Well, we're in a new Cold War
with China. Why are we tolerating these
Chinese-friendly regimes in Havana and
Caracas close to home? And we need to,
you know, prove to China and Russia that
we can basically take care of business
close at hand." I mean, how how do how
do you think that fits into any of this?
>> I'm sure it does. I'm sure it does. And
there are elements of it elements, with
which I agree. We should not be letting
Hezbollah run around Venezuela.
Um, we should not be letting Iran uh,
build up a drone force in Venezuela.
Uh, we should, I think, be willing to
use force
to prevent that from happening.
Um,
the rest of it, uh, of course, I don't
agree with. I mean,
um, and and I think it's I think it's a
little bit, uh, exaggerated in the case
of Venezuela.
There is a Russian presence in
Venezuela.
Um, I don't think it's ever exceeded
four or 500
uh, men
on the ground. Uh, they're trainers.
That's all they've been doing. So,
I don't think that's that's such a big
deal. Uh, but yeah, I mean, if you look
at the national security strategy, the
president seems to be,
you know, concerned about this. And and
it uh,
he I'm sure thinks of it as part of his
legacy.
Do you think that
this has effects serious ripple effects
for either
Ukraine policy or Taiwan policy? I mean,
this is, again, something we're 3 days
in, and I have read incredibly detailed
arguments
both making the case that this, you
know, is sort of a prelude to the US
abandonment of Ukraine and Taiwan, and
making the case that what we're
demonstrating here is a military
supremacy that, you know, should throw
Russia and China both back on their
heels. How How do you think about any of
that? I don't know. I mean,
You You You know,
you invited me about 5 minutes ago uh,
to step into the mind of Donald Trump.
And I can't do that. And
I don't know what he's thinking about
all of this. There's a great danger in
the sphere of influence argument,
obviously. Um, that is the way Russians
talk about the so-called near abroad.
Um, and it's an argument that Xi Jinping
could use.
>> Where the idea is basically, if America
gets to
do things in the Caribbean,
we get to do things in Taiwan. And
>> Yeah, but but, you know, I would point
out that, um,
uh,
Putin acted first in Georgia under
George W. Bush, and then in Ukraine
before Donald Trump did anything about,
um, Venezuela before in some cases
Donald Trump was president. So, the
notion that Putin needs our
uh, excuses or justifications or advice
or ideology [snorts] for him to invade
countries is silly.
>> Right. Yes. Now, I I I agree. I think
the weakest argument is the claim that
uh, now
the US won't have the moral standing to
defend Ukraine or Taiwan, because I
don't think anyone in Beijing or Moscow
is worrying about those arguments
anyway.
Um, instead of going inside the mind of
Trump himself, let's end by going inside
the minds of people around him, because
you do have experience serving in a
Trump administration. And it seems like
a lot of what has happened
in both Trump administrations, but maybe
more in the first, has been people with
a sort of
traditional Republican internationalist
Reaganite view of the world trying to
manage someone who
at the very least thinks in the terms
that you described just like early 20th
century, you know, sort of US [snorts]
Dollar diplomacy.
>> Thank you. Dollar diplomacy, picking the
best son of a available and so on,
right? And Republican presidents
you know, we can argue about how much
this was true of Reagan, but it was true
in different ways, I think, of
Eisenhower, Nixon, George H.W. Bush, and
now of Trump have always felt a certain
kind of comfort in saying we're
supporting
you know, nasty regimes for the time
being in an environment of geopolitical
threat. And I guess it seems to me that
that that has to be what a bunch of
people inside the White House
are telling themselves right now
pursuing this policy. That Russia,
China, it's all a mess, and we can get
to a somewhat better outcome here
without
even if we don't get all the way to a
late '80s, early '90s end game.
>> Well, tell me what's wrong with that is
this.
What they are sacrificing here
is two enormous assets. I would argue
they're greatest assets of the United
States. A,
they're threatening our alliance system.
Something Russia doesn't have, China
doesn't have.
We have had ever since World War
II. They seem to be devaluing and
threatening that. Secondly,
I believe one of our greatest assets is
the association of the United States
with the cause
of liberty.
And they seem to be abandoning that as
well. Well, just on that note, to end on
a point of agreement, since I I do think
I am
uh
more of a foreign policy realist in some
sense than you are,
I also do think that even America's most
realist presidents, whether it was
Eisenhower or Nixon,
tended to speak the language
of liberty, to have that public that
kind of public rhetoric. And
it seems like that is what is most
absent here. Yes, I agree with that. I I
and I think it's a gigantic mistake for
the United States.
>> [music]
>> All right. On that note, Elliott Abrams,
thanks so much for joining me.
>> Thank you. It's been a pleasure.
>> [music]
[music]